## Climate Change Adaptation Assessment

_Figure 1 Map of the Union of the Comoros _

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/64316315/109801571-f0751480-7c1e-11eb-91ec-47ca6ad544ea.png)

Source: (Union of Comoros: National Marine Ecosystem Diagnostic Analysis (MEDA). Agulhas and Somali Current Large Marine Ecosystems (ASCLME) Project., n.d.) 

#### Current Climate (Baseline) 
The Union of the Comoros, an archipelago in the Indian Ocean, is characterized by an evolution of microclimates that is impacted by its topological relief. The 
country’s weather is influenced by south and south-east trade winds from the months of April to November, which carry a relatively cool and dry tropical current 
between the months of May and October. The hot and rainy season descends in the months of December to March, when the north-west monsoon prevails. The warmest 
period is from November to April. The hot season is marked by humidity and frequent storms due to the tropical depressions near the archipelago or by the passage of 
the intertropical convergence front. The coastal zone exhibits an average temperature of 27oC, with a maximum temperature variation between 31oC and 35oC and a 
minimum of about 23oC. The cool, dry period known as the rainy season, has minimal humidity, comparatively lower temperatures and presence of winds or sea breezes. 
In low altitudes the minimum average temperature ranges between 18 oC and 19oC. Annual rainfall ranges between 1000mm and 5000mm depending on the region and is 
influenced by the altitude and exposure to strong winds. The Western regions of the Comoros, for instance in Grand-Comoro, the highest annual rainfall recorded is 
above 4000mm at the elevation of the Karthala forest due to exposure to monsoons and a higher topological relief. Whereas, the islands of Mohéli and Anjouan exhibit 
the highest range of annual rainfall between 2500mm and 4000mm.  

#### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks 
The Comoros NAPA suggests that current and future climate change impacts are expected to undermine development gains, especially in the fight to eradicate poverty 
and ensure socioeconomic security. Against a weak economic system, the income opportunities and prospects that ensure alternative livelihoods in response to climate 
change are very limited. Climate change presents a unique challenge to the Comoros, which has to deal with the impacts and risks of climate change. The challenges 
that countries face, particularly Small Island Developing States (SIDS), is magnified due to their small geographic territory, isolation and exposure. What is more, 
development gains are threatened due to slow onset events such as sea level rise and other natural hazards including storm-surges. The country has a largely 
maritime tropical weather, marked by rainfall variability, early onset and prolonged droughts, and warming- evident by a 1oC rise in the average temperature. The 
trade winds and monsoon winds that can reach speeds of 100km/s in Moroni, at times exhibit a cyclonic nature, and the variance between the warmest and coolest 
average temperature is in the order of 4oC. 

#### Emerging Climate Trends 
Given the 1960 to 1989 period, a steady reduction in rainfall was observed between 1960 and 1975. In 1976, the rainfall pattern surged, followed by strong 
fluctuations for the remaining period. The intense rainfall peaks that were observed in 1976 could be attributed to El Niño, which has been increasing in 
frequency and intensity in East Africa region in the last half century. According to the NAPA, these trends are predicted to continue into the future. What is 
more, the frequency of cyclones and storms is predicted to intensify with increasing unpredictability. In the Comoros, 23 cyclones were reported between 1911 and 
1961, 13 cyclones between 1967 and 1986 and in 2004 numerous losses in human lives and damages were reported as a result of forceful cyclones in the South West 
region of the Indian Ocean.  

As a result of irregular rainfall patterns, the Comoros has experienced shortened periods of the rainy season from 6 months to 3 months, with a shift to the dry 
season and the persistence of drought. The variation in rainfall is also expected to alter the temporal and spatial distribution of available water resources 
important for agricultural production. It therefore follows that these trends cause long-term modifications in the vegetation cover and livestock availability.  

For the last thirty years, the warming of the Comoros has exhibited through the rise in the minimum and maximum temperatures. The 1961 to 2008 period depicted a 
15% decrease in cold days and nights, and a 20% increase in hot days and nights across the country. Furthermore, warming in the order of 1oC was observed over 
the 1961 to 2008 period with a variation of +/- 0.2oC per decade.  

#### Future Climate Scenarios: Projected Future Climate 
Although the Comoros is a carbon sink of Greenhouse Gases (GHGs) and only contributes minimally to emissions (2.3 teq CO2/hab/yr), it is still threatened by the 
impacts of climate change. The predicted impacts that the country faces include a decrease in agriculture and fishery production, loss of biodiversity, 
displacement of over 10% of the population that reside in coastal areas, contamination of groundwater sources due to saltwater intrusion and a rise in the 
incidence of malaria cases6.  

According to the IPCC, climate change scenarios for SIDS in the Indian Ocean for the 2040-2069 period indicate an increase in the annual average rainfall in the 
order of 3.1% (+/– 0.45%) with a decrease in the annual average rainfall during the dry season by a range of about -2.6% to -1.8 %. With respect to annual 
average temperatures, IPCC scenarios for the islands of the South West part of the Indian Ocean indicate an increase of 2.10oC in the 2040-2069 period. 
Furthermore, sea level rise is predicted to reach 0.20m by 2050. Considering a 1.5oC rise in the average ocean temperature, coral whitening would cause the 
damage or even death of coral reefs and lead to the reduction of marine flora and fauna, including reef fish. This would have a direct impact on deep sea fishery 
resources due to declining fish populations and could lead to the loss of income for those working in the fishery sector.  

Tourism services would be adversely affected due to damage or destruction to coral reefs. According to the NAPA, the economic valuation of tourist services with 
respect to coral reefs under the jurisdiction Mohéli Marine Park is USD $3.5 million, representing 1.3% of GDP7. Ultimately, the impacts of emerging climate 
trends are numerous. The Comoros is expected to endure intensified soil erosion, hotter summers, frequent droughts particularly north of the islands and 
accelerated sea level rise, which would have adverse impacts on tourism, port facilities and human settlements8.  

The Second National Communication describes the climate scenarios for the Comoros grounded on IPCC projections for future (2025, 2050 and 2100) temperature and 
rainfall based on the 1961-2000 reference period. The predictive results are obtained by using the MAGICC/SCENGEN software that explores future climate change 
and its uncertainties. The Special Report on Emission Scenarios has four sets of scenarios called “families”: A1, A2, B1 and B2. The A1 scenario depicts a future 
of very rapid economic growth and global population that peaks mid-century and declines thereafter, given the rapid introduction of new and efficient 
technologies. The A2 scenario describes a very heterogenous world, with continuously increasing global population and fragmented economic growth and 
technological change. The B1 scenario, similar to A1 describes global population peaking mid-century and declining thereafter, with an emphasis on environmental 
sustainability.  

According to the Second National Communication, the warming of temperature scenarios in the Comoros, projected for the 100-year horizon between 2000 and 2100 is 
grounded on the following assumptions: 

- a) Scenario B (low pathway): increase of 1.27oC on average (probable range: 0.16oC to 2.9oC) 

- b) Scenario A1B (intermediate pathway): increase of 1.40oC on average (range probable: 0.16oC to 2.70oC 

- c) Scenario A2 (high pathway): increase of 1.46oC on average (probable range: 0.16oC to 3.22oC) 

By 2025, the evolution of average temperatures will lead to monthly temperature increases, the highest of which will be observed from the months of January to 
April and November to December. This will translate to a rise in average temperatures between 0.61 and 0.78oC, and a decrease in average rainfall by 14% for the 
month of October.  

By 2050, rainfall is predicted to marginally increase for the months of December to April, and decrease for the remainder of the year. At the national level, 
this will result in an increase in average temperature between 1.26oC and 1.47oC.  

By 2100, warming of temperatures will intensify with a variation in average temperatures of about 1.99oC to 2.35oC. The temperature rise will be marked in the 
north of the islands. Thermal variation also indicates a near doubling in temperature from 2050 to 2100. Rainfall predictions suggest a significant reduction 
between the months of August and November.  

Based on these climate scenarios, Scenario B1 shows warming of temperatures of 0.16oC in 2000 to 2.29oC in 2100, suggesting a temperature rise of 2.13oC over the 
course of the century. Whereas, scenario A2 predicts a more pronounced warming of temperatures of 3.06oC. 

### ASSESSMENT OF KEY SYSTEMS

#### Agriculture 
The Comoros’ economy is highly reliant on the agriculture sector and gives way to 66.9% of jobs for women and 51.2% of jobs for men. The primary sector employs 
70% to 80% of the active population and contributes to 98% of export revenues given a limited range of cash crops. The Comoros exports crop commodities such as 
vanilla, cloves and ylang-ylang, which comprise 90% of the country’s total exports. At present, the Comorian export market is underdeveloped and vulnerable to 
world market fluctuations. Given that agriculture production is mainly for domestic consumption, only 30% of total production is allocated for commercial 
purposes. The country’s dependency on the import of food products is however increasing; currently the country imports almost 95% of its rice for consumption. 
Food crop production includes bananas, tomatoes, coconuts, corn, beans, cassava, yam, taro, sweet potatoes and other tubercles. What is more, agriculture in the 
Comoros only covers 40% of the food needs of the population and follows a strictly pluvial practice, one that is largely focused on subsistence but not 
sufficiently mechanized. Chemical fertilizers are used sparingly, if at all, and the agricultural sector benefits rather minimally from investments.

##### Priority Area: Development of Crop Commodities
Agriculture represents 90% of the total land area in Anjouan, 77% of Mohéli and 61% of Grande Comore based on four farming systems, which include open field food 
crop production, traditional agroforestry, cultivation in natural forests and monoculture farming. Agriculture in the Comoros is influenced by both endogenous 
and exogenous constraints such as population growth that has surpassed growth in agricultural production as well as changes in local diets with a proclivity 
towards imported food products. The supply chain for export crop commodities comprise vanilla, ylang-ylang and cloves. Despite its low productivity, vanilla 
holds the highest value in terms of exports, comprising 43% of export production. However, vanilla production has fallen from 200 tonnes in the 1990s to 50 
tonnes in 2009.

_Figure 2 ylang-ylang flower (Cananga Odorata) and basket of cloves (Anjouan, Comoros)_

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/64316315/109802033-9294fc80-7c1f-11eb-8fa6-ed60d6210074.png)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/64316315/109802070-9fb1eb80-7c1f-11eb-9603-a05c8f494f5a.png)

_Source: Gettyimages and Marco Casiraghi_

The Comoros is one of the leading producers of ylang-ylang, meeting an estimated 70% of global demand, however, production of the essential oil has been in long 
term decline over the past 30 years. Ylang-ylang oil is a key ingredient in many fine fragrances. The Cananga Odorata crop is produced by smallholder farmers in 
Anjouan and Mohéli, subsequent to which, the flowers are distilled by small distillers.  Ylang-ylang oil is used in many high-end perfumeries, which makes it all 
the more attractive for export production. In consideration of the export-oriented agriculture, a few limitations need to be address that involve low-tech 
farming practices using rudimentary equipment for power-intensive operations such as plowing, threshing and harvesting activities. Low mechanization together 
with variable technical capacities among farmers result in lower quality crop production. Ultimately, a priority for the Comoros will be to revive ylang-ylang 
production and improve vanilla and clove exports by enhancing the technical and operational capacity of domestic producers in line with international quality 
standards. Notwithstanding, climate change impacts such as temperature and rainfall variability, sea level rise and probable salt water intrusion in coastal 
areas, could affect ylang-ylang plantations, which could lead to the loss of income for producers and affect export revenues.  

##### Vulnerability of the Agriculture Sector 
The impacts of climate change and climate variability on the biophysical process of natural ecosystems generates potential harms to the agriculture sector. It 
causes the delay of fruit maturation as a consequence of prolonged droughts and high temperatures. What is more, the reproduction cycle of plant and crop 
parasites and disease agents such as coconut aleurodidae (Aleurotrachelus Atratus) coincide with the crop production cycle. New parasites continue to emerge and 
parasites that were previously regulated are re-emerging and at times in their most virulent forms, causing the destruction of crops. This decrease in 
agricultural productivity leads to the loss of income, livelihoods and intensifies issues of food insecurity. When coupled with extensive agriculture, high costs 
to access food and dependence on food imports, this renders a large segment of the population vulnerable.  

As detailed in the Second National Communication, the key socioeconomic impacts on agriculture include: (I) prolonged droughts and water shortages, (II) 
degradation of cultivable land, (III) decrease in the production of specific cultivars, (IV) increased food insecurity, (V) lower agricultural income, and (VI) 
increased unemployment and precarious work, particularly among young people.   

##### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks 
The agriculture sector in the Comoros bears threats due to climate change impacts such as thermal stresses to the environment including the warming of 
temperature in extremes, including the prevalence of crop diseases caused by parasitic and disease agents, and changes in rainfall patterns and rainfall 
intensity. Heavy rains, a pronounced dry season and high temperatures accelerate the degree soil erosion, land degradation and desertification, with adverse 
effects to the integrity of agricultural lands. According to the NAPA, a total of 65 335 acres of agricultural lands, which represents 57.5% of the total 
agriculture area, are degraded. Moreover, the North West and South East regions, which comprise eroded coast zones 1.5km to 3km long, pose flood risks from sea 
level rise and experience more water shortages than all other agricultural regions in the Comoros. The country is further exposed to strong cyclones and their 
subsequent destruction of crops, triggering a reduction in crop yields and causing disruption to food security. Climate impacts and subsequent risks to livestock 
involve plant and cattle diseases (e.g., Newcastle disease and smallpox) that lead to livestock death, degradation of grazing pastures and health impediments to 
existing cattle such as growth retardation, reduction in milk production and sensitivity to diseases.   

[Projected Impact on the Agriculture Sector:] 

In the Comoros, changes in rainfall will cause the reduction of river flows and waterfalls that will lead to reduced water availability required for agriculture. 
To date, the country has experienced a decrease in rainfall by about 0.5mm per annum. Disruptions to the agro-climatic zones triggers a drier climate that causes 
changes to local water resources. All in all, marginal variations in temperature and precipitation are causing major shifts in the water flow, particularly in 
Ndzouani and Mwali. The drop in local agricultural production will affect livelihoods and dimmish purchasing power of consumers, whereas a surge in the global 
demand of major crops will cause a 25% to 150% increase in the price of rice, wheat and maize by 2060.  

##### Adaptation Options
- Examination into and enhancement of cultural practices to reduce the impacts of water and thermal stress 

- Surveying and development of crop varieties resistant to water and thermal stress, to ensure food security 

- Offering technical advice and extension services to producers on production techniques to generate high quality yields 

- Development and adoption of heat-resistant cultivars 

- Enhancement of farming practices that reduce pests and crop/plant diseases  

- Floodproofing’ measures (such as elevation of living spaces)  

- Adoption of climate smart agricultural techniques 

- Promotion of agroforestry  

- Grouping of farmers into cooperatives and pooling of equipment and resources 

- Improvement to land-use planning  

- Marketing of new soil protection techniques 

- Provision of improved access to microcredits to procure farming equipment and machinery 

- Establishment of agricultural insurance schemes or risk transfer mechanisms to protect against loss of or damage to crops or livestock 

- Development of an integrated pest management program  

- Relaunching of national research and extension programs 

#### Fisheries
Despite a 12-mile territorial sea and 200-mile exclusive zone, fisheries in the Comoros are largely small-scale and harness around 10 000 tonnes of fish 
production annually10. The fishery sector is among the key sectors in the Comoros and plays a critical role in the economy. In many ways it supports job creation 
and income generation for a large segment of the society and contributes significantly to improving food security. The Second National Communication estimates 
that the fishery sector provides 8,500 direct jobs for fisherman and an additional 24,000 indirect jobs in shipyards, marketing and equipment stores11. The 
Comoros lacks an offshore industrial fishery and the industrial fisheries that exist are those exploited by distant fishing nations. In fact, between the 2007 
and 2012 period, an estimated 22 000 tonnes of fish resources per annum were caught by fishing vessels flagged in the Comoros harvesting fish in the Economic 
Exclusion Zone (EEZ)12. What is more, inland fishing is acutely rare due to the dearth of rivers, water courses and lakes and semi-industrial fishing and 
aquaculture are non-existent. The totality of fishery products is marketed locally or consumed fresh. The processing of fish is minimal and limited to salt cured 
fish and fish smoking as preservation methods.   

_Figure 3 Capture production by inland and marine waters of the Union of the Comoros (tonnes)_

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/64316315/109802422-13ec8f00-7c20-11eb-805b-919d3a2b7641.png)

_Sources: FAO FishStat_ 

Traditional fishing in the Comoros accounts for 40% of the dietary need in terms of animal proteins, comprising an estimated per capita consumption of 25.2 kg in 
2011. The Comorian people exhibit a preference of reef fish to pelagic fish. The offshore pelagic potential amounts to 20 000 tonnes, yet only 30% of pelagic 
fish have been sustainably exploited. Fish resources in the Comoros consist of offshore and coastal pelagic species, demersal species and reef species. The 
demersal resources of the continental plateau, which covers 900km2, are estimated to be 450 to 1 350 tonnes per annum, while coastal pelagic resources 
amount to 900 to 2 700 tonnes per annum.  

Artisanal fishing takes places by means of small fiber glass motorized boats ranging from 6.3m to 7.1m in length. As of 2012, there were a total of 5 800 boats 
across the Comorian islands, of which 30% comprised motorized fishing boats. Traditional fishing is described by the use of non-motorized wooden outrigger boats 
(canoes) and account for 70% of the vessels surveyed. The national production of fish has increased from 6 000 tonnes in 1985 to 16 200 tonnes in 2004, which has 
contributed to the abandonment of fresh fish imports and has amply added foreign currency to the domestic revenue base. National fishing catches are distributed 
across the 3 islands of the Comoros, 60.8% from Grande Comore (Ngazidja), 29.6% from Anjouan (Ndzouani) and 9.6% from Mohéli (Mwali), 60% of which constitute two 
main species, namely the skipjack tuna and yellowfin tuna.

_Figure 4 Wooden boats in the old harbor of Moroni, Grande Comore, Comoros_

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/64316315/109802511-3088c700-7c20-11eb-8de7-129bb4fcbbbe.png)

_Sources: Gettyimpages_

##### Priority Area: Fish Conservation and Preservation   
Means of preservation extend the storage life of fish without substantially altering its natural state. Losses of catch due climate impacts such as high 
temperatures in the absence of means of preservation to reduce post-harvest losses in fisheries, leads to a decrease in fisherman’s income. Therefore, proper on-
board handling of fish, for example ensuring fish are chilled and that good hygiene conditions prevail to avoid cross contamination, as well as ensuring the 
physical integrity of fish to avoid bruising and damage to fish flesh and accelerated spoilage is a priority for the Comoros. Moreover, the conservation of 
fisheries is critical to the ecological balance of the marine system, the social well-being of the population and the economic growth potential of the country. 
In the Comoros, fishing during cyclonic periods and heavy rains leads to limited catch and a chronic deficit of fish in the market, especially for poorer 
populations. Construction of conservation facilities for fish as well as selective fishing gear that avoids the capture, retention, and subsequent discarding of 
immature fish and unwanted species is increasingly important for the country’s ecological sustainability. 

##### Vulnerability of the Fishery Sector 
Sea level rise and shifts in coastal hydrodynamic processes could impact coastal areas by causing flooding and saltwater intrusion, while warming of temperatures 
could threaten the health and integrity of coral reefs across the islands. Limited income and social protection mechanisms make it further challenging for 
fishermen to invest in small-infrastructures or facilities such as cold storages or ice machines to help preserve fishery resources and reduce post-harvest 
losses. Due to constraints in establishing means of preservation that extend the storage life of fish, ‘fish conservation under ice’ is among the main adaptation 
priorities described in the NAPA. This would not only benefit fisherman but the entirety of local actors across the fish supply chain, including fishmongers and 
local suppliers. 

##### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks 
The worsening of climatic conditions, specifically the frequency and intensity of storms, cyclones and other extreme weather events render fishery activities 
unmanageable and often result in the loss of fisherman’s income and pose adverse impacts on tourism services. Whitening of coral reefs has historically been an 
issue for the Comoros. In particular in 1997, a rise in sea temperatures in the range of 1 oC to 1.5oC relative to average temperatures of 26 oC to 28 oC caused 
the whitening and death of approximately 60% of coral reefs across the islands. The destruction of coral reefs also promotes the acceleration of coastal erosion 
and the contraction in in the number of reef fish, including juvenile fish populations.  

##### Adaptation Options 
- Fish Concentration Mechanisms, which will facilitate an increase in catches, in order to better value the contribution in time worked  

- Investment in small-infrastructures and facilities for fishing communities e.g., cold storage, ice-machine and landing sites, with proper management systems to ensure their sustainable use 

- Construction of conservation facilities for fish 

- Means for reducing post-harvest losses in fisheries 

- Means of preservation that will extend the storage life without substantially altering the nature of the raw material 

- Selective fishing gear that avoids the capture, retention, and subsequent discarding of immature fish and unwanted species 

- Proper on-board handling of fish, for example ensuring fish are chilled and good hygiene conditions prevail to avoid cross contamination 

#### Water Resources 
Climate variability has led to the decline in rainfall in the country, which has severely impacted the quality and quantity of freshwater. High temperatures have 
further accelerated evapotranspiration, which has contributed to the reduction in the supply of groundwater reservoirs. Surface water in Anjouan and Mohéli are 
mainly supplied through river water and wells, whereas water resources in Grande Comore are primarily supplied through coastal aquifers.  In the Comoros, as is 
the case in a number of LDCs, the reduction of water resources influences the availability of potable water. At present, the quantity of potable water is 
insufficient to meet the population’s needs. The coverage of the population with access to drinking water comprises 30% of the population of Grande-Comore, 15% 
of Anjouan and 80% of Mohéli. Rainfall fluctuations, seasonal disturbances and prolonged droughts are some of the determinants of persistent water shortages, 
which create issues in the implementation of basic domestic activities such as food preparation, maintenance of hygienic conditions and waste treatment. 
Furthermore, the agriculture and livestock sectors are highly dependent on the availability, accessibility and quality of freshwater sources. Banana trees for 
instance, are often hacked and used to water cattle, however this practice results in undernutrition and produces high susceptibility to parasitic diseases such 
as theileriosis. Cases of theileriosis in cattle have led to the deaths of 20% of bovines in Grand-Comoro between 2002 and 2003. 

##### Priority Area: Extend water supply and improve water quality   
Improving the water supply by strengthening water distribution networks and enhancing water quality are identified as strategic priorities in response to the 
vulnerabilities of the water resources sector. Such vulnerabilities include poor water management, low supply of potable water and inadequate coastal and flood 
protection measures. As local communities play an integral role in sharing local and indigenous knowledge on water resource management with a focus on 
sustainability, their participation is vital to the success of adaptation projects and programs. Indeed, the construction of barrages and dams to collect and 
store rainwater and the regulation of river water based on existing hydrographic networks across the three islands underpinned by an inclusive stakeholder 
approach, will be critical. Ultimately, the establishment of sound watershed management is expected to support the sustainable distribution of water resources, 
help visualize current land use and the varying degrees of degradation, and support the development of future scenarios against which plans can be made to 
protect and improve the quality of water and other natural resources.  

##### Vulnerability of the Water Resources Sector 
The environment radiates a natural fragility and holds a limited availability of critical resources such as freshwater. There is great variability in rainfall 
across the Comorian islands. The profile of Grande Comore soils exhibit high permeability. The lack of surface water also puts downward pressure on groundwater 
systems required to collect and store rainwater. Water tanks are often left uncovered and are poorly maintained. Contamination of groundwater aquifers due to 
exposed water tanks and saltwater encroachment along the coastal zone increase the prevalence of malaria and other vector-borne and waterborne diseases. Coastal 
waters are typically brackish as a result of saltwater intrusion. Conversely, Mohéli and Anjouan are originally endowed with quasi hydrophobic soils and a dense 
hydrographic network. However, river and stream flows have declined considerably over the last two decades. Previously, there were over 40 rivers to supply the 
islands’ population with water. Today, fewer than 20 rivers remain and during warmer months, surface water evaporates, increasing incidences of siltation. On the 
island of Grande-Comore, the freshwater supply stems from basalt tanks which requires maintenance that often falls short13.  

##### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks 
Climate change impacts on the water resources sector have been demonstrated in myriad ways. In recent years, the groundwater has been depleted in the dry season. 
In Grande-Comore sea level rise has led way to saline intrusion of coastal aquifers, which has altered the quality of freshwater with damaging effects for crop 
irrigation and groundwater supplies. A survey in the 1980s revealed that after the excavating of 44 exploration wells in the coastal zone, only 24 wells 
demonstrated salinity under 3g/l. Follow up evaluations undertaken in 1997 disclosed that over half of the surveyed wells were not functional and an estimated 
31% displayed issues related to pumping and sewage facilities.  

Decreased precipitation has narrowed the hydrographic network and disrupted the fragile balance between freshwater and saltwater resources. The encroachment of 
seawater is particularly harmful to coastal communities that depend on the freshwater for household activities and farming practices. The risk of contamination 
of freshwater is high, owing to high soil porosity and an upsurge in the concentration of sodium chloride as a result of seawater intrusion14. The loss of 
freshwater vegetation could indirectly impact the dietary composition of affected populations.  

Based on a bacteriological analysis conducted in Anjouan to test microbiological parameters of freshwater, 60% of the collected water was shown to be 
contaminated. Contaminated water is also a known cause of hepatitis A and typhoid fever, which are both transmitted through ingestion of contaminated food and 
water, and have plagued the island for many years, causing adverse health effects and even death.  
 
##### Adaptation Options 
- Increase in water supply by strengthening water distribution networks and infrastructure 

- Reconstruction of basin slopes 

- Promotion of small hydraulic installations and protection of hydrological units 

- Involvement of local communities in planning and sustainable management of water resources 

- Construction of artificial lakes, barrages and dams to store rain and river water 

- Construction of reservoirs of drinking water and preservation of water quality 

- Introduction of monitoring policies of resources and use of appropriate tools (techniques and juridical), for the control rivers and forests 

- Examination of current and future availability and demand of water resources  

- Preparation of a comprehensive assessment of the available hydrological potential, including groundwater resources 

- Assessment of biophysical features, such as climate, geology, topography, soils, water quality and quantity in terms of infiltration rates and runoff, natural 
vegetation, fauna 

- Assessment of socioeconomic conditions, and livelihoods analysis e.g., major resource user groups, farming systems, actual land uses, local institutions and 
service providers, and relevant policies and laws 

- Watershed/ River basin mapping and zoning to visualize current land uses, the degree of degradation, etc., and to develop future scenarios 

- Action research for joint problem analysis, the identification of solutions, and immediate field-testing and validation of improved practices in each area 

- Establishment of watershed/ river basin management committees; preparation of watershed management/ river basin management plans 

- Implementation of prioritized activities; monitoring and documentation of processes, results and impacts; and capacity building for all stakeholder 

#### Energy  
According to the literature, a well-defined energy policy for the Comoros does not yet exist, however, a strategy for the diversification of energy sources is 
under development. A mere 25% of Comorian households are connected to the power grid. The high cost of accessing electric power is sighted as the main barrier 
for poorer households. The electricity supply is described as erratic in major towns and is essentially nonexistent in rural areas. As such, the government and 
people of the Comoros are determined to pursue GHG emission reduction targets and transition to renewable energy sources.  

The energy supply in the country is dominated by fuelwood (78%) as a result of biomass exploitation in domestic activities and for its part in powering 
operations in ylang-ylang distilleries. Imported petroleum products constitute 20% for their use in electricity and transport, while butane gas (2%) represents a 
small amount of the energy supplied. There is a strain on already depleted fuelwood resources and limits in terms of alternative sources of energy. In regards to 
biomass, alternative plants such as oilseed plants (i.e., coconut, sesame, peanut and Jatropha Curcas) are being explored with the view to generate bioenergy.  

Despite its hydroelectric potential, the islands of the Comoros have an estimated 1 MW of installed hydroelectric capacity16 and further studies are required to 
assess the country’s full hydropower potential. The country is deficient in oil and gas reserves and it also exhibits a low potential to harness wind power. 
Whereas, geothermal energy satisfies the country’s ability to meet the population’s energy demands. According to a UNEP country brief, the geothermal reservoir 
on Grande Comore based on a rift system linked to active volcanos (namely the Karthala and La Grille), could be potentially tapped. Solar energy also 
demonstrates great potential for expansion as the islands experience an average of 500 wh/m2 equivalent to 8hrs/day of sunshine17. What is more, numerous solar 
installations exist at both domestic and commercial levels and even hotels are shifting to solar energy to reduce their carbon footprint and contribute to a 
green economy. 

 ##### Priority Area: Biomass (Exploration into fuelwood alternatives) 
The energy sector in the Comoros is characterized by numerous constraints, power supply in major towns is erratic and essentially non-existent in rural areas, 
for example sources of lighting in rural expanses are limited to small paraffin lamp with wicks. As a priority adaptation option among renewable energies, 
biomass operates as a renewable and sustainable source of energy. Biomass fuels includes those derived from wood, charcoal, scrap lumber, forest debris, and 
certain varieties of waste residues. By sustainably exploiting wood and charcoal alternatives, such as oilseed plants (i.e., coconut, sesame, peanut and Jatropha 
Curcas), biomass could offer relatively cleaner fuels that could be used for cooking and heating in homes, and as a fuel alternative (e.g., ethanol) in 
transportation and power generation. Biomass power plants that use biomass-derived waste to generate electricity, could in the long run contribute to carbon 
neutral electricity by supporting the transition away from traditional fossil fuel usage towards an alternative energy source, which produces relatively less GHG 
emissions from wood waste or other organic residuals. This in turn advances adaptation and mitigation efforts by offering an accessible, cost efficient, 
renewable energy source that improves air quality in the process.    

##### Vulnerability of the Energy Sector 
The Comoros lacks a clear and sustainable energy policy at the national level. Policy reforms enacted in the 1990s in favor of fossil fuels that encouraged the 
use of oil in lieu of fuelwood, influenced the level of emissions for that period. Specifically, biomass emissions amounted to 242 728 tonnes of CO2 in 2002 
against 328 000 tonnes in 1994. Higher emissions were accounted for during that period due to the retrogression towards fossil fuels. In addition to the adverse 
environmental impacts of fossil fuel usage, imported petroleum and hydrocarbons incur high costs. In 2009, the Voidjou power plant in Grande-Comore was impacted 
by catastrophic disaster. The total installed power capacity fell from 18MW and currently stands at 12 MW, however only 5MW is available. The capacity factor of 
power plants in Anjouan and Mohéli similarly represent under 50% of the installed capacity. The power grid is faulty which generates losses of 40% of the total 
electricity production. These factors among others, are relevant to the fact that 75% of Comorian households are not connected to the power grid. Hydropower 
energy production falls during the dry season when water resources diminish. Lack of funding is also a significant factor in the Comoros’ inability to fully 
pursue the development of hydroelectric power. While biomass is a preferred renewable energy source for its waste reduction capacity, versatility and 
accessibility, biomass from wood does not burn entirely clean and contributes to massive deforestation when not properly managed. Forest clearing, particularly 
in rural areas are common due to the need of firewood and timber. This presents an opportunity for the sustainable land use management.   

##### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks 
In consideration of the two main primary energy sources, namely biomass and hydrocarbons, the exposure to climate impacts and risks should be carefully assessed. 
First, the extensive use of biomass has put a strain on already depleted fuelwood resources and if not adequately and sustainably managed could intensify current 
levels of deforestation. In effect, emissions emanating from the energy sector increases with population growth and the energy needs of the transport and 
industrial sectors. The very high costs of electric energy and oil have already resulted in the extensive felling of trees for firewood to meet household 
consumption. Land degradation, landslides and soil erosion could further impair an already fragile natural system. As rainfall fluctuations become more 
pronounced, this could directly impact biomass production. The irregular supply of groundwater, especially the depletion of freshwater reservoirs in the drier 
periods, increases the vulnerability of natural and human systems. Therefore, improved water harvesting techniques and infrastructure (e.g., dams and pits) and 
functional irrigation systems are critical to ensure water resource efficiency. Climate change further impacts the reproduction cycles, distribution, and 
intensity of pests and diseases.  

The Comoros’ disaster risk profile indicates that the greatest flood hazard associated with tropical cyclones occurs on Anjouan and Mohéli, while storm surges 
are greatest along the southern and eastern coasts of the Comoros18. Such extreme weather events could impact the productivity of biomass feedstocks. Further to 
this, the greatest absolute risk of loss from earthquakes is Grande Comore. Although infrequent, inquisitions should be made as part of a study on the potential 
effects of earthquake and volcano (specifically, the Karthala and La Grille) interactions on geothermal energy production in the Comoros.  

##### Adaptation Options 
- Developing the capacity of the energy sector in the Comoros and implementing cost reductions related to energy consumption by households 

- Promoting the use of appropriate renewable energy-based lamps  

- Improving energy efficiency, particularly that of biomass  

- Soil and nutrient management to ensure richness of biomass feedstocks 

- Investing in conservation measures against deforestation, and promoting massive afforestation and reforestation in and around river basins  

- Ensuring irrigation efficiency, stress-resistant crop varieties, and improved land management  

- Improved flood protection mechanisms and expansion of rainwater harvesting and water storage to enhance feedstock productivity 

- Development of robust biomass power plants 

- Use of multi-hazard early warning systems for rainfall and temperature extremes to support emergency harvesting in advance of extreme weather events 

- Ensuring resilient ecosystems through implementation of targeted biodiversity policy measures 

- Behavioral adaptation measures that educate local communities on various forms of renewable energies and the need to retire/phase out fossil fuels 

- Promotion of agroforestry techniques to enhance soil fertility, soil moisture and increase soil organic matter 

#### Biodiversity 
The Comoros is an archipelago, which covers a total surface area of 2236km2, comprising four volcanic islands situated along 225km of a submarine shelf. It is 
marked by its volcanic landscape, small size and insularity. The Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is approximately 160 000km2, with 900km2 of continental shelf and 
427km of coastline19. In the Comoros, there are an estimated 2000 plant species such as the Khaya, the Comorensis, the Ocotea and the Tambourissa leptophylla on 
the islands of Grande Comore, Anjouan and Mohéli. The country boasts 50 species of coral that cover 60% of the coast of Grande Comore, 80% of Anjouan and almost 
100% of Mohéli. Mammal species include the Livingstone's fruit bat, the Mongoose lemur and the Comoro rousette. Endemic bird species comprise the Karthala white-
eyes, the blue pigeon and the Karthala scops owl, among others. While endemic reptile species include the Comoro Flapnose Chameleon and the Comoro Clawless 
Gecko.  

_Figure 5 Moya beach on the island of Anjouan_


![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/64316315/109803153-fec43000-7c20-11eb-91a5-d18d0c180169.png)

_Sources: Gettyimpages_

The islands of the Comoros have an extremely narrow continental shelf of volcanic origin and subsequent poor development of coral reefs. Still, the coastal and 
marine ecosystem on Grande Comore is rich and diverse including coral reefs, mangroves, seagrass beds, tri-colored beaches, lava flows, and islets. Coral reefs 
are home to key species such as the hawksbill turtle as well as mollusks, sea cucumbers and reef fish, essential for ensuring food security and coastal 
livelihoods. Seaweed beds are recognized for their high productivity and abundance of fauna, they also serve as habitat for the green turtle (Chelonia Mydas) and 
the dugong (Dugong Dugon). Islets are vital for seabirds and home to turtle nesting sites where marine turtles lay their eggs. Coral reef systems are 
characterized as diverse, complex and among the most productive of the marine systems. Coral reefs serve as green infrastructure based on their natural coastal 
protection mechanisms, absorbing between 70% to 90% of wave energy. Coastal areas of the islands are rich in biodiversity and home to endemic species including 
ecosystems with significant ecological value. Further to this, Lake Dizan Boudouni covers a surface area of 30 acres in the southern part of the island of Mohéli 
and is highlighted for its biodiversity of flora and fauna of great scientific interest.  

_Figure 6 (left) Green sea turtle (Chelonia Mydas) in Mayotte and (right) a green Hawksbill turtle in Mayotte_

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/64316315/109803251-1dc2c200-7c21-11eb-89ba-8bf6fa6cf825.png)

_Sources: Gettyimpages_

##### Priority Area: Protection of biodiversity and coastal ecosystem 
The Comoros is characterized as a biodiversity hotspot with high endemic species and key threats. Yet the potential of the biodiversity is not well understood, 
which leads to weak environmental protection as well as the misuse and mismanagement of natural resources and natural habitats. The Comoros harbors the most 
important eggs-laying site for marine turtles in the Indian Ocean and the 10th in the world20. It therefore follows that a key priority area for the Comoros is 
the protection of marine turtles and their natural habitat along the coastal zone. Climate impacts such as sea level rise and saltwater intrusion exacerbate 
coastal erosion, which when coupled with the exploitation of beach aggregates, results in the diminution in the number of sea turtles. The disappearance of sea 
turtles is predicted to have an adverse effect on major economic activities related to the tourism sector, upon which it depends. The income generated from 
trading beach aggregates (inert granular materials such as sand, gravel, or crushed stone) support the livelihoods of coastal inhabitants. However, the 
extraction of aggregates in coastal zones has physical and environmental implications for the erosion of the coastal land. In the absence of coastal management 
policies and practices, tourists that are drawn to observing nesting sea turtles in their natural habitats will likely look to other tourism destinations where 
protection and conservation are prioritized.  

##### Vulnerability of the Biodiversity Sector 
The natural environment in the Comoros is described as fragile.  The area classified as a “hotspot zone” is highly endemic yet exposed to threats. Anthropogenic 
effects such as the mismanagement of natural resources leads to poor protection and subsequent exploitation of natural resources. For example, population growth 
and increasing poverty combined with deforestation stemming from unsustainable agricultural practices could threaten the country’s national biodiversity 
heritage. Auspiciously, the adoption of the National Environmental Policy of 1993 has to some degree created an enabling environment for the protection of 
biodiversity and the promotion of environmentally sustainable agricultural production. With respect to fresh waterbodies, the Grande Comore lacks permanent river 
systems. The soils are composed of porous basaltic base of limited use. In effect, fragile soils are vulnerable to erosion, including gully erosion, and tectonic 
instability. The low pluviometry, particularly in the eastern parts of the islands contributes to degraded soils and coastal erosion. Additionally, the lack of 
monitoring mechanisms and available data on open sea marine resources intensifies vulnerabilities of the marine system. Pollution as a result of marine gasoil 
from fishing vessels, and overfishing of species affect the integrity of seagrass beds, while sea turtles are contemporaneously threatened by beach degradation, 
attenuation of seagrass beds and unsustainable poaching practices. Coastal and marine species, specifically immature fish and unwanted species, are also 
occasionally captured, retained, and subsequently discarded. To boot, there has been a steady exploitation of local demersal resources.   

 ##### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks 
The influence of climate on the biophysical process in the Comoros has been widely observed. For instance, rainfall fluctuates at varying altitudes and at 
different levels of wind exposure. There are changes in average climatic conditions and seasonal discrepancies, with impacts to the hydrologic cycle, causing 
rivers to dehydrate. Increases in flood risk, decreases in groundwater level and acceleration of soil erosion are also evident. With respect to the oceanographic 
system, very strong currents have been observed at the western region of the island of Anjouan.  

The impacts of climate change are predicted to reduce agriculture and fishery production, cause the loss of biodiversity, and contaminate freshwater resources, 
including aquifers along the coast due to seawater encroachment and increases in the prevalence of infectious diseases such as typhoid and malaria. Saltwater 
intrusion often also produces brackish water along the coast. Such impacts are expected to drive the displacement of over 10% of coastal inhabitants. 

Anthropogenic effects of development such as overfishing and unsustainable fishing practices that involve the use of dynamite or poisonous substances, pollution 
such as waste dumping and soil runoff, together with the exploitation of coral and beach aggregates continue to threaten natural systems. Coral reef systems are 
at risk of destruction. It is estimated that by 2030, 60% of all coral reefs will be impacted by anthropogenic activities such as pollution as well as ocean 
acidification, as a consequence of the absorption of CO221. The phenomenon of climate-induced coral bleaching due to sudden changes in ocean temperature remains 
a risk. By 2050, bleaching of corals in the Comoros will result in a 90% mortality rate of coral reefs in the Comoros. Comparably, nearly all species of 
mangroves are predicted to disappear by 2050 due to global temperature rise. While sea level rise is expected to destroy all the remaining mangroves that would 
have survived global warming. 

##### Adaptation Options 
- Conservation and sustainable management of biodiversity, including wildlife in protected areas and forests 

- Reforestation and rehabilitation of degraded and desolate lands while conserving natural biodiversity  

- Cataloguing of national forest and marine genetic resources to assess climate resilience 

- Promotion of best practices in forest, coastal and marine genetic resource management, specifically in the areas of conservation, exploration, testing, breeding and sustainable use 

- Promotion of biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of natural resources 

- Enacting laws and policies on the prohibition of extraction and trading of beach aggregates  

- Monitoring and evaluation of coastal management practices 

- Investing in well-designed coastal protections such as dikes, levees and groins to reduce expected damages and enhance cost efficiency  

- Protection of the coastline through ‘soft’ protection measures such as beach nourishment and wetland restoration 

- Enforcement of coastal zoning regulations that prohibit construction in flood areas 

- Measurement of beach dynamics for modelling future climate scenarios such as sea level rise and storm surges 

- Control of land-based and ocean-based activities to reduce pollution and lower sedimentation, especially in coastal and marine areas    

#### Tourism  
The Comoros tourism sector, although in an embryonic stage of development displays strong potential for expansion. Tourism in the Comoros is described as 
offering a rich biologically diverse ecosystem, with natural resources of great global and scientific interest. The tourism sector is globally acknowledged as a 
climate-sensitive economic sector. Both demand and supply side stakeholders are directly impacted by climate variability and extreme weather events including 
secondary effects on a broad range of natural resources that are critical for the tourism sector. Prior to 1989, tourism was predominantly driven by business 
activities, missions and visits by the Comorian diaspora. However, since the opening of hotel Galawa in 1989, tourism in the Comoros has taken a shift towards 
leisure. Although, since 2000 the number of incoming tourists has plummeted, from 27 474 tourists in 1998 to 18 900 tourists in 2003. Compared to other island 
destinations in Africa such as Mauritius and the Seychelles, the hotel occupancy rate in the Comoros is exponentially lower. What is more, quality of standard 
and comfort is not consistently upheld. Despite the 600 personnel employed in hospitality services, a majority of hotel establishments are in fact managed by 
nonprofessionals and poorly trained hotel staff. Under current conditions, the Comoros tourism industry is confronted by a number of challenges that will 
influence its long-term development and success, among these include climate change and sustainability, human resources, and productivity and competitiveness23. 

 ##### Priority Area: Ecotourism  
Promotion of the Mohéli marine park would help develop ecotourism in the archipelago, providing effective economic incentives to support conservation and improve 
the bio-cultural diversity and protect the natural and cultural heritage of the country. The marine park would serve as a marine protected area to safeguard a 
section of the ocean by imposing limits on human activity. In regards to the economic value of tourist services such as the coral reefs, the Mohéli Marine Park 
is an estimated 1.2 billion Comorian Francs equivalent to USD $3.5 million. Further to the promotion of the marine park, national tourist services in the Comoros 
need to be improved. Currently, there are insufficient tourist services and hotel accommodation capacity is limited. Improvements in terms of basic hotel 
infrastructure, education and training of hotel personnel and tourism-related workers, and enhancements with respect to public information on tourism information 
resources is required. 

##### Vulnerability of the Tourism Sector 
The tourism sector in the Comoros is underexploited and according to the Second National Communication, tourism and hospitality services are inadequate and 
accommodation capacities are quite limited. For instance, there are less than 500 beds with an annual occupancy rate of under 40%. Education and skills 
development are also critical for tourism destination countries and a persistent challenge in LDCs. In order to meet tourism growth, the Comoros will need to 
focus on service quality standards both physically via hospitality and accommodation services, and virtually by means of expedient tourism information resources 
websites.  

Sand mining of beaches accelerates coastal erosion and is expected to negatively affect the future development of tourism. The national economy and the 
livelihoods of coastal communities is largely provisional on the tourism and fishery sectors. The disappearance of sea turtles is also predicted to have an 
adverse effect on major economic activities related to the tourism sector. 

 ##### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks 
The Comoros is expected to endure intensified soil erosion, hotter summers, frequent droughts particularly north of the islands and accelerated sea level rise, 
which would have adverse impacts on tourism, port facilities and human settlements24. These climate trends are predicted to cause changes to the country’s 
vegetation cover, with consequences to the subsistence of certain plant and animal species and cause the destruction of natural habitats. According to the 
literature, several beaches namely those in Itsandra, Mitsamihouli, Maloudja, Chomoni and those belonging to the islands of Nioumachoua, Moya, Ouani and Mirontsi 
are expected to disappear due to sea level rise. Based on economic projections, the loss of tourism revenue associated with the disappearance of beaches is 
estimated to be reach the current value 40 billion Comorian Francs by 205025.  

Floods and cyclones are expected to cause major damage to dwellings, property and critical infrastructure, as well as affect inhabitants and destroy crops. 
Damages to hotels and tourist centers, including roads, airport facilities and water and sewage systems could directly undermine the tourism sector. In the 
absence of coastal management policies and practices, tourists that are drawn to observing nesting sea turtles in their natural habitats will likely look to 
other tourism destinations where protection and conservation measures are prioritized. Coral bleaching and the subsequent destruction of coral reefs as a result 
of climate change will not only impact the livelihoods of coastal communities and put pressure on food security, but also destabilize an economy that is highly 
dependent on the growth of the tourism sector.  

 ##### Adaptation Options 
- Sustainable development and promotion of the Mohéli marine park  

- Preparation of a climate change risk assessment for the tourism industry 

- Creation of risk maps (e.g., for floods, landslides and coastal erosion) for planning tourism development projects 

- Monitoring of eroded coastal zones (e.g., beaches)  

- Ensure principles of public-private cooperation in the tourism sector 

- Training of National Agencies in monitoring climate change effects on coastal resources, natural systems beneficial to tourism and natural attractions (beaches, reefs) 

- Conducting environmental audits and retrofit programs for hotels and marinas to add climate change component 

- Ensuring new infrastructure incorporates a hazard-resistant designs and retrofitting existing buildings and coastal structures 

- Using an integrated approach to tourism development across a wide spread of government ministries and integrating green agenda policies into tourism and non-
tourism policies 

- Education and training focused on developing customer-service skills for local front-line staff to deliver high quality tourism services to visitors27  

- Well-targeted tourism policies to promote innovation (e.g., human resources, knowledge, R&D, information technology), the development of new business models, and a dynamic culture of enterprise28  

#### Disaster Risk Management 
Disaster risk reduction is still a nascent area of work in the Comoros. According to the NAPA, disaster risk management and coordination mechanisms are still 
under development and en route to being operationalized. In the country, disaster risks are closely associated with climate change risks and impacts. A segment 
of Comoros’ INDC that focuses on risk management includes priorities such as capacity building of Geographic Information Systems (GIS), development of risk 
assessments, awareness raising to improve the understanding of disaster risks, and preparation of civil society on disaster risk management. According to the 
2020 human development indicators for the Comoros, a mere 29.2% of Comoros’ population reside in urban areas29. Analysis indicates that on average, the Comoros 
has around USD $5.7 million in combined direct losses from earthquakes, floods and tropical cyclones every year30. Tropical cyclones pose the most significant 
risk of the three hazards, producing an estimated 64% of the average loss per annum. Cyclones such as the one that took place in 1950, claimed 524 lives on the 
island of Grande Comore and equivalent losses were recorded on the other islands. Beyond this, seven severe cyclones and storm surges occurred between 1986 and 
1999 in the Comoros.  

##### Priority Area: Building the capacities of GIS, EWS and disaster risk assessments 
In order to be successful, climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction strategies require public interest, leadership, and acceptance31. The IPCC 
suggests that based on the knowledge of disaster risk research and findings, the condition for understanding climate risks and extreme events involves knowledge 
of different key elements. These include, understanding the exposure within its spatial and temporal dimensions, recognizing drivers of vulnerability, and ways 
in which climate change influences hazards. Key for the Comoros will be the development of technical capacities and measures that include Geographic Information 
System (GIS), Early Warning Systems (EWS), disaster risk assessments and risk communication between decisionmakers and local inhabitants. Risk communication 
failures experienced in other countries suggest that trust in official institutions responsible for early warning and disaster management in the Comoros is vital 
for reducing disaster risks.  Moreover, it is important to engage different stakeholders to process the existing or impending challenges and identify respective 
solutions.   

##### Vulnerability of the Disaster Risk Management System 
There are numerous disaster risks in the country, which involve volcanic eruptions in Grande Comore, as well as tropical cyclones, floods and to a lesser extent, 
tsunamis. Eruptions of the Karthala volcano on Grand Comore have, on three occasions, resulted in the evacuation of many towns situated on the slopes of the 
mountain. Other disasters on Grande Comore based on anthropogenic hazards include the Voidjou power plant disaster in September 2009, characterized as one of the 
worst disasters of its time. In general, the Comoros’ status an LDC and SIDS renders it highly vulnerable to climate change impacts and extreme weather. 
According to literature, the Comoros displays a vulnerability rate of 82.1% based on the 2011 Human Development Report, which indicates the country’s high level 
of exposure to numerous natural risks and threats.  

The increase in intensity and frequency of extreme weather and slow onset events such as floods and droughts, exacerbate vulnerability to infectious diseases, 
trigger disasters and destruction of natural resources, and perpetuate socioeconomic problems associated with daily life. Forced migration and displacement due 
to extreme weather would be difficult to control. Weather-related disasters in the Comoros deprive households of secure dwellings, and cause the destruction of 
pastures and meadows which disrupt farmers’ means of agricultural production and subsistence. Loss of productivity in sectors such as commerce, energy and 
transport, together with secondary effects in all other economic sectors limit future investments and put downward pressure on consumption, ultimately lowering 
GDP. Increased vulnerability in the absence of social protection mechanisms suggests insufficient means and opportunities to recover from climate and disaster 
related shocks. The combination of the status of socioeconomic development in the country, coupled with climate sensitive resources such as water, forests and 
soils, and the level of development of critical infrastructure, is too precarious to reasonably offset the effects of climate change and climate variability.   

##### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks 
Earthquakes, floods and tropical cyclones comprise the three most common hazards in the Comoros. Other natural hazards include landslides, wind, storm surges, 
excessive rainfall and earthquakes. Anjouan incurs the highest economic losses of the three islands, amounting to 80% of the average annual losses from all three 
hazards across the archipelago. The greatest wind hazard is in the northeast and southeast of Anjouan. The greatest flood hazard due to tropical cyclones is in 
Anjouan and Mohéli. While the greatest storm hazard runs along the southern and eastern coasts of the Comoros. The residential sector is generally the hardest 
hit and experiences 80% of the combined losses, followed by 11% of losses in the public sector and 6% in the commercial sector32. Direct losses total USD $5.7 
million from earthquakes, floods and tropical cyclones every year. The losses of human lives are linked to the resurgence of infectious diseases. Climate risk 
associated with seasonal drought is expected to lead to 34% loss of human life, while cyclonic events are predicted to cause a 24% loss in human life33.  

Further to this, the 100-year return period loss from earthquakes, floods and cyclones totals over $48 million which is equivalent to about 8% of the Comoros’ 
GDP in 2014. The assessed total replacement value in 2015 for all residential, industrial and public buildings and other infrastructure was reported to be nearly 
USD $2.6 billion. The island of Grande Comore exhibits the largest concentration of replacement value. With respect to occupancy type, the residential sector 
reports above 66% of the toral replacement value34.

_Figure 7 Direct losses by Hazard_

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/64316315/109803802-c709b800-7c21-11eb-9dd2-05d5b2cfb32e.png)

_Sources: Gettyimpages_

##### Adaptation Options 
- Setting-up of a multi-hazard early warning systems and surveillance systems   

- Establishing coastal protection measures (dikes, embankments, sea walls and surge barriers)  

- Provision of access to climate- and disaster-related information (both emergency information and training programmes),  

- Provision of economic resources including financial means such as micro-credit and resilience insurance   

- Provision of different tools, methodologies, and sources of knowledge (e.g., expert/scientific knowledge, local or indigenous knowledge) that allow capturing new hazards, risk, and vulnerability profiles, as well as risk perceptions 

- Ensuring adequate risk communication to reach different audiences to make risk comprehensible, exploring ways to understand audience values, anticipating the 
audience’s response to the communication, and improving awareness and decision making 

- Integration of climate and disaster risk policies and considerations into sector policies and management plans 

- Creation of a database and a Geographic Information System (GIS) to better anticipate, respond to and manage disaster risks  

- Strengthening of national security systems and response to affected individuals or communities in case of a disaster  

- Establishment of a National Committee for Risk and Disaster Management 

- Establishment of a General Directorate of Civil Security (DGSC) within the Ministry  

#### Waste and Sanitation  
The anarchic development of urban centers marked by informal housing and spontaneous districts has increased risks of pollution in the country. There are no 
sustainable waste management solutions in the Comoros, which is a significant cause for concern as open burning of household waste is common and largely 
uncontrolled. The Second National Communication highlights that inadequate waste management and cleaning systems increase the prevalence of infectious diseases 
such as malaria and typhoid, and present potential risk of contamination of groundwater reservoirs and damage to coral reef systems. The deterioration of coral 
reefs results from exposure of the reefs to unsustainable fishing practices such as the use of dynamite, uncontrolled anchoring of ships, treading at low tide, 
waste dumping and soil runoff35. Anthropogenic hazards coupled with climate variability, magnifies the effects of coral bleaching, which is caused by the 
precipitous warming of ocean temperatures. In the Comoros, waste is scattered along the coastal zone and in the vicinity of townships and metropolitan areas. The 
lack of a drainage and waste management system also signals that wastewater flows directly into the ocean. Water distribution infrastructure needs to be 
adequately developed and managed, water tanks need to be covered to reduce the risk of vector-borne diseases, and the treatment and disposal of municipal, 
industrial and other solid waste should be prioritized.  

##### Priority Area: Improve urban waste management system  
Population growth, expressly in urban areas, and the lack of waste management causes the indiscriminate dumping of household waste in close proximity to coastal 
areas and the ocean, with harmful effect on the marine system. In the absence of proper waste management system and sanitation systems, public health issues 
arise as wastewater and solid waste discharges generate the spread of communicable diseases. In addition, improper disposal of waste directly contributes to air 
pollution. Whereas the urban waste management system consists of a number of septic tanks to dispose of sewage in towns, in rural expanses households rely on pit 
latrines. In consideration of the fact that a large concentration of solid waste emanates from large cities, as a priority, the focus will be upon improving the 
urban waste management system.  

 ##### Vulnerability of the Waste Sector  
The aggregate amount of urban solid waste disposed in landfill sites is estimated at 28.37 Gg per year36. In effect, the low levels of emissions of solid waste 
in landfills is explained by lack of adequate waste collection and disposal methods in the country. Municipal solid waste and wastewater form main sources of GHG 
emissions in the waste sector. The methods used for the disposal of solid waste are linked to aerobic decomposition, which produces low levels of emissions. 
Still, in the Comoros, a mere 2% of the population predominantly situated in urban areas use toilets with a flush mechanism. Based on a study highlighted in the 
Second National Communication, findings suggest that there is a lack of substantial disparities between urban and rural expanses, as over 79% of the population 
continue to use traditional latrines for waste treatment and disposal. In Grande Comore, 60% of the population is dependent on uncovered water containers and 40% 
of the population is reliant on coastal aquifers. Challenges in terms of access to clean water still persist. Deterioration in the quality of potable water as a 
result of contamination from products of weathering and erosion, human and animal excrement, and other hazardous waste and chemicals, and other issues such as 
chronic problems with water supply, as well as high costs to access water all contribute to the vulnerabilities of the waste sector.  

 ##### Exposure to Climate Impacts and Risks 
In the Comoros, pollution from waste, which is diversified and large in quantity, is principally concentrated in large cities along the coast. Due to high 
reliance on imports, most of the waste that is identified consists of mainly imported and non-biodegradable products such as plastic, glass and metal37. When 
waste is incorrectly disposed, blocked drainage systems and stream flows can generate flood disasters. Major risks of pollution are further aggravated in the 
open sea by large oil tankers. Whereas, illegal waste dumping can trigger the spread of infectious diseases and vermin, as well as increase the risk of 
contamination of groundwater reservoirs and coral degradation38. Waste incineration is also a contributor to GHG emissions for its role in the release of dioxins 
and furans into the atmosphere. Improper treatment and disposal of wastes that go unchecked result in contamination of waterbodies, which cause biodiversity loss 
due to chemicals and harmful toxins that destroy terrestrial or marine fauna and flora. In the absence of solid waste management, waste such as sewage sludge, 
special waste and leachate can pollute waterbodies with irreparable harm. 

##### Adaptation Options 
- Development or transfer of appropriate technologies and systems for wastewater treatment 

- WASH awareness campaigns and education on proper waste disposal and hygiene practices to ensure behavioral change 

- Source separating solid wastes for composting, recycling, anaerobic digestion or special disposal 

- Improving coordination with municipalities at all district levels in the collection and verification of data on solid waste and relevant reporting procedures  

- Ensuring political will and commitment to improving solid waste management, supported by a strong regulatory environment 

- Ensuring the necessary infrastructure is in place to support sustainable waste management 

- Creation of outlets for buying of recyclable wastes in every community including job creation or entrepreneurial development schemes
